NOTES ON NURSING: WHAT IT IS, AND WHAT IT IS NOT

BY

FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE.

1859

LONDON:
HARRISON, 59, PALL MALL,
BOOKSELLER TO THE QUEEN.


ORIGINALLY PRINTED BY HARRISON AND SONS,

ST. MARTIN'S LANE, W.C.

Retrieved From: http://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/17366/pg17366.txt


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tea and Coffee

A great deal too much against tea is said by wise people, and a
great deal too much of tea is given to the sick by foolish people. When
you see the natural and almost universal craving in English sick for
their "tea," you cannot but feel that nature knows what she is about.
But a little tea or coffee restores them quite as much as a great deal,
and a great deal of tea and especially of coffee impairs the little
power of digestion they have. Yet a nurse because she sees how one or
two cups of tea or coffee restores her patient, thinks that three or
four cups will do twice as much. This is not the case at all; it is
however certain that there is nothing yet discovered which is a
substitute to the English patient for his cup of tea; he can take it
when he can take nothing else, and he often can't take anything else if
he has it not. I should be very glad if any of the abusers of tea would
point out what to give to an English patient after a sleepless night,
instead of tea. If you give it at 5 or 6 o'clock in the morning, he may
even sometimes fall asleep after it, and get perhaps his only two or
three hours' sleep during the twenty-four. At the same time you never
should give tea or coffee to the sick, as a rule, after 5 o'clock in the
afternoon. Sleeplessness in the early night is from excitement generally
and is increased by tea or coffee; sleeplessness which continues to the
early morning is from exhaustion often, and is relieved by tea. The only
English patients I have ever known refuse tea, have been typhus cases,
and the first sign of their getting better was their craving again for
tea. In general, the dry and dirty tongue always prefers tea to coffee,
and will quite decline milk, unless with tea.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

How To Visit The Sick And Not Hurt Them

Always sit within the patient's view, so that when you speak to him he
has not painfully to turn his head round in order to look at you.
Everybody involuntarily looks at the person speaking. If you make this
act a wearisome one on the part of the patient you are doing him harm.
So also if by continuing to stand you make him continuously raise his
eyes to see you. Be as motionless as possible, and never gesticulate in
speaking to the sick.

Never make a patient repeat a message or request, especially if it be
some time after. Occupied patients are often accused of doing too much
of their own business. They are instinctively right. How often you hear
the person, charged with the request of giving the message or writing
the letter, say half an hour afterwards to the patient, "Did you appoint
12 o'clock?" or, "What did you say was the address?" or ask perhaps some
much more agitating question, thus causing the patient the effort of
memory, or worse still, of decision, all over again. It is really less
exertion to him to write his letters himself. This is the almost
universal experience of occupied invalids.

This brings us to another caution. Never speak to an invalid from
behind, nor from the door, nor from any distance from him, nor when he
is doing anything.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health of Houses

There are five essential points in securing the health of houses:

1. Pure air.
2. Pure water.
3. Efficient drainage.
4. Cleanliness.
5. Light.

Without these, no house can be healthy. And it will be unhealthy just in
proportion as they are deficient.

Pure Air

To have pure air, your house must be so constructed as that the outer
atmosphere shall find its way with ease to every corner of it. House
architects hardly ever consider this. The object in building a house is
to obtain the largest interest for the money, not to save doctors' bills
to the tenants. But, if tenants should ever become so wise as to refuse
to occupy unhealthily constructed houses, and if Insurance Companies
should ever come to understand their interest so thoroughly as to pay a
Sanitary Surveyor to look after the houses where their clients live,
speculative architects would speedily be brought to their senses. As it
is, they build what pays best. And there are always people foolish
enough to take the houses they build. 

Pure water

Pure water is more generally introduced into houses than it used to
be, thanks to the exertions of the sanitary reformers. Within the last
few years, a large part of London was in the daily habit of using water
polluted by the drainage of its sewers and water closets. This has
happily been remedied. But, in many parts of the country, well water of
a very impure kind is used for domestic purposes. And when epidemic
disease shows itself, persons using such water are almost sure to
suffer.

Drainage

It would be curious to ascertain by inspection, how many houses in
London are really well drained. Many people would say, surely all or
most of them. But many people have no idea in what good drainage
consists. They think that a sewer in the street, and a pipe leading to
it from the house is good drainage. All the while the sewer may be
nothing but a laboratory from which epidemic disease and ill health is
being distilled into the house. No house with any untrapped drain pipe
communicating immediately with a sewer, whether it be from water closet,
sink, or gully-grate, can ever be healthy. An untrapped sink may at any
time spread fever or pyæmia among the inmates of a palace.

Sinks

The ordinary oblong sink is an abomination. That great surface of stone,
which is always left wet, is always exhaling into the air. I have known
whole houses and hospitals smell of the sink. 

Another great evil in house construction is carrying drains underneath
the house. Such drains are never safe. All house drains should begin and
end outside the walls. Many people will readily admit, as a theory, the
importance of these things. But how few are there who can intelligently
trace disease in their households to such causes! Is it not a fact, that
when scarlet fever, measles, or small-pox appear among the children, the
very first thought which occurs is, "where" the children can have
"caught" the disease? And the parents immediately run over in their
minds all the families with whom they may have been. They never think of
looking at home for the source of the mischief.

Cleanliness

Without cleanliness, within and without your house, ventilation is
comparatively useless. In certain foul districts of London, poor people
used to object to open their windows and doors because of the foul
smells that came in. Rich people like to have their stables and dunghill
near their houses. But does it ever occur to them that with many
arrangements of this kind it would be safer to keep the windows shut
than open? You cannot have the air of the house pure with dung heaps
under the windows. These are common all over London. And yet people are
surprised that their children, brought up in large "well-aired"
nurseries and bed-rooms suffer from children's epidemics. If they
studied Nature's laws in the matter of children's health, they would not
be so surprised.


Light

A dark house is always an unhealthy house, always an ill-aired house,
always a dirty house. Want of light stops growth, and promotes scrofula,
rickets, etc, among the children.

People lose their health in a dark house, and if they get ill they
cannot get well again in it. More will be said about this farther on.



